ARTHUR GIFFARD WHITESIDE JOHNSTONE was born December 3rd, 1861, the
fourth son of the Rev. Edward Johnstone and Frances Mills. His father
was then taking the duty at Colton in Staffordshire, but in the
following year accepted the living of Warehorne in Kent; this he
resigned in 1866 and went to live at St. Leonards. Mr. Johnstone died in
1870, and the direction of Arthur's education fell entirely upon his
mother. Mrs. Johnstone gave her life to good works and to the care of
her children, one of whom was an invalid. Arthur looked on her as a
saint, and the thought held up his belief in humanity during the
somewhat long struggle when his powers and aims were uncertain, and when
he had to observe excessive dulness, dreariness, and meanness at close
quarters. He was also beholden to her for the gift that was at last to
determine his career. She was a good musician, and it was from her that
Johnstone inherited his fine taste and received his first instruction in
music. Later he studied under Mr. W. Custard, a local organist. The
atmosphere of his home was religious--extreme Anglican approaching to
Roman Catholic. Johnstone, though he became by reaction anti-clerical,
continued to appreciate the value of religion, chiefly through art and
music, as his letters and criticisms show. But his bent was secular as
well as artistic; a high Anglican school and a high Anglican college
were therefore not a pasture in which he could thrive. His spirit was
foreign to theirs. It says much for his strength of mind, that these
institutions left him able to admire certain forms of Christian art.

In 1874 he went to Radley and remained there four years, doing neither
well nor ill, stifled rather in the ecclesiastical atmosphere of the
school, caring little for games, and out of sympathy with the public
school spirit. He therefore lived his own life, learnt to protect
himself by ingenious tact and reserve, and read irregularly what he
liked. Though not specially built for athletics he was by no means
lacking in bodily arts and dexterities. When quite young he was a first
rate billiard-player, a good skater, and at lawn tennis well above the
average. His chief accomplishment was an odd one which never left him.
During these early years he made a constant pastime of conjuring, and
devoted to it much of his leisure and some of his business hours. He
even gave elaborate entertainments in public, from the age of fourteen.
On one occasion when he was only seventeen he was able to apply his
skill to a really practical use. He was going by train to give a
performance and happened to enter a compartment where there was a gang
of card sharpers. They drew him into playing "Nap" with them; soon he
began losing and knew that he was being cheated. They were using the
ordinary conjuror's cards with plain white backs, of which he had a
supply in his pocket. He soon found an opportunity of replacing their
pack with one of his own, won back his losses with schoolboy
satisfaction, and changed carriages at the first stopping-place, leaving
the experts to solve the mystery for themselves. His self-possession in
public and private, the mature and slightly initiate air that became
less marked as he grew older, were probably due to these performances.
They served in his real education. The intellectual side of what is
usually common showman's art attracted him. The psychology of the
conjuror's victim, amused and angry, straining all his wits on the wrong
point; the festal atmosphere, or _Stimmung_, of inattentive youth and
good temper necessary for success, the real poverty of intricate
mechanical appliance compared with skill and patter--of these things he
would talk in youth with an Edgar-Poe-like elaboration and solemnity, no
doubt as well as any man in England. The best of these exhibitions was
when Johnstone was professing to explain to a few friends a trick of his
own doing. There came first, in long and well-cut sentences, a kind of
metaphysic of conjuring; an account of those principles of delusion that
were inapplicable in the present instance; exposure of the vulgar and
obvious methods, which seemed to the crowd the same as those subtler
ones which merely satisfied the conscience of the artist; and lastly, on
the verge of the "explanation," a long parenthesis or a touch of
coldness and abstraction, not to be interrupted, which ended, if at all,
not in any explanation whatever, but in a last performance of the trick.
Johnstone made a point of seeking acquaintance with the chief professors
of manual illusion who visited England. He well knew, of course, the
methods of signalling to counterfeit clairvoyance; and in one case, that
of "Little Louie," whose show at the Westminster Aquarium was the best
public marvel of the sort, he was convinced that the performers only
eked out by signalling and other tricks the failures of some genuinely
supernormal power of the "telepathic" kind which they themselves did
not fully understand. We say thus much about legerdemain, as it was long
our friend's quaint and picturesque substitute for the less original
forms of young men's amusement. It gave a good deal of pleasure to other
people, and he needed amusement, for his life was not to be easy.

Johnstone left Radley at the end of the summer term 1878, and for the
next two years worked under Messrs. Wren and Gurney for the Indian Civil
Service, the limit of entrance then being nineteen years. It must be
admitted that he made no serious attempt to succeed, and that here, as
at Oxford later, the prospect of an examination proved to be the reverse
of an incentive to work. Perhaps it was fortunate for him that he
failed, for though he would have found a great interest in the natives
(and extended his _répertoire_ of tricks) he would have been repelled by
the average Anglo-Indian; besides, his abilities did not lie in the
direction of legal and political administration. In October, 1880,
Johnstone came up to Keble College, Oxford, and he quickly had a small
circle round him. Among his friends were R. A. Farrar, son of the
well-known Dean, and G. H. Fowler, the biologist, of his own College;
Winter, of St. John's, the best musician among undergraduates; his
biographers; and, later, Prof. York Powell, who instantly detected his
ability and force of nature. Amongst the dons of Keble, Johnstone cared
for two. One was the Warden, the Rev. E. S. Talbot, now Bishop of
Southwark, who behaved with tact, and encouraged as far as he might a
mind of no pattern type, which would not bring the College any
regulation honours; the other was the Rev. J. R. Illingworth, the best
writer of the school, and since known as a philosophical preacher.
Ascetic, but thoroughly humane, Mr. Illingworth attracted Johnstone by
his honesty and fineness of temper. But these clergymen, after all,
dwelt in their own world, not in his. Until he met York Powell,
Johnstone had found no older man from whom he could learn without
cautions and reservations, and who struck him as a master-mind and a
perfectly free spirit. The two men signally valued each other's
conversation; they had many delicate qualities in common--the kind of
delicacy only found in Bohemians of experience who have kept their
perceptions at the finest edge. Powell materially helped Johnstone more
than once by letting persons of consequence know what he thought of his
younger friend. Even in Powell's record there was hardly any friendship
more completely unruffled.

In youth, as an undergraduate, Johnstone was sallow, but healthy, rather
lean and light, with a large and well-moulded musician's head, like
Beethoven's or, still more, Rubinstein's, in the outline of the
overhanging brow. It is easy to recall that earnest face, that
delightful smile always characteristic of him, and, above all, the
fascination of his playing on the piano. His voice was clear and carried
well, with a sharp metallic ring when he was indignant, but was usually
pitched low, as if unwilling to be overheard. His manner was formed and
his talk was from the first what it remained: forcible, emphatic, and
undoubtedly over-superlative at times, cut into quaintly elaborate but
perfectly built sentences, which came so naturally to him that we have
heard him discharge one of them the moment after opening his eyes in the
morning. They can best be illustrated by his more familiar style in his
writings and letters; the latter, indeed, give a fairly exact reflex of
his talk. A _flâneur_ of the best kind, he observed closely and
curiously; in spite of long spells of apparent idleness, the alert
quality of his mind never showed the faintest trace of slackness. He
described vividly and accurately; and he had a remarkable gift for
explaining any subject or point of view unfamiliar to his listeners,
careful that the slightest detail should not escape them. And, in turn,
he would quickly catch up and develop the ideas of his friends however
vaguely suggested or insufficiently thought out. Johnstone professed
Radical principles and was a member of the Russell Club, where the
advanced Liberals met for papers and debates; but his Radicalism was
social rather than political, and after the foreign experiences of his
later years his opinions tended in the direction of strong government
and Imperialism. At this time it amused him to be rather eccentric in
dress, though he afterward became trim and fairly modish. In 1882 the
intellectual undergraduate was capable of wearing a wide-brimmed,
light-brown, hard hat, descending over the ears and eyes and long hair
penthouse fashion. He had one of these "built for me, ground plan and
projection" on a special scale. He also had a tie which could be folded
into twenty-five different aspects or patterns, some of them striking;
it was a mosaic of squares, and the harvest of a long search;
twenty-five neckties in one. His collars were ultra-Byronic. Otherwise
he was not markedly strange in attire; though the real incongruity was
between these freaks of dress, and the keen intent grey gleam of his
eyes, and the look of held-in vehemence and sensibility.

To what did this sensibility tend, what did it crave for? Not chiefly
for definite learning, or book-knowledge, or for abstract philosophical
truth. Johnstone's nature and gifts did not set towards scholarship
(except afterwards to musical scholarship) or to pure speculation. He
wanted, no doubt, to write, but he never cared to practise style as a
mere handicraft; "let us have," he would say, "something with blood in
it." He did not ask for religious solutions or consolations. Since
nearly all he printed was on musical subjects, only his letters and our
memories can give the impression of what he wanted. It was a
sufficiently rare ambition among the Oxford young men of our time,
though often enough professed. He wanted art and beauty. This desire, of
course, in others often was a cant; there were scholars and
verse-makers--more or less of the "æsthetic" type--sentimental and hard
at bottom like most such persons, who cultivated beauty, and have
usually come to nothing except prosperity. Johnstone was of another race
to these; they never heard of him; he did not care for the main chance;
he was in profound earnest. Few young men looked at life with so
definite an aspiration to get the grace, enjoyment, and beauty out of
it, and so definite a conviction that not much of these things is
attainable. To such spirits, pre-appointed to suffer and wait, society
seems at first an irrational welter, out of which, as by a miracle,
emerge enchanting islets of grace, and wit, and cheer. The desire to
find beauty in things or persons, and the desire to find soul and
humanity, are the unalloyed, intense, and usually disappointed passions
of elect youth claiming its rights. It is the second of them that saves
a young man from the conceit and exclusive folly that may beset the
first. Johnstone's tastes, his reading, loves and friendships were
guided by these two passions, and by a third which took off from the
strain of them, and was equally imperious--the wish to study the world
and to be entertained reasonably. Classes did not exist for him, except
that he often felt he was more likely to be able to foregather with and
help men and women who were at a discount in the world. With such
warring elements and a spirit so hard to satisfy, it was no wonder that
his earlier years seemed planless, and in part were so. The instinct for
travel and odd experience lasted long. No one but his near friends had
much knowledge of this complex but essentially single nature. To them
there seemed to be more than a seed of nobility and fair example in such
a youth, so externally disappointing to parents, and guardians, and
shepherds of colleges. Out of it was gradually wrought a character full
of fire and aspiration, fundamentally austere and uncompromising in
loyalty and in artistic conscience, but masked under a certain
reticence. But this is to forestall by several years.

  [Illustration: AGED 20.]

Johnstone had entered Oxford at a time of great intellectual ferment.
Looking back we can now see that it was during the years about 1880 that
the revolutionary flood ran highest. The authority of Darwin and Huxley
was unquestioned by many of the younger generation and all-embracing.
The vague Christianity and sentimental optimism of Tennyson was held in
little esteem beside the wider tolerance, the subtle analysis, the
ceaseless curiosity of Browning. Above all "the Bard," as Swinburne was
admiringly called, was the poet of the young men. Another very important
factor in the mental development of our generation--and for Johnstone,
perhaps, the strongest of all--was supplied by the French literature of
the century, from the Romantic School onwards. It is no wonder,
therefore, that the reaction from the High Church influences and
surroundings of his youth was severe and complete, and that his highly
æsthetic nature demanded the fullest artistic and intellectual freedom.
The so-called "æsthetic movement," as we have before implied, left him
untouched. He would have nothing to do with the attempt to symbolise and
revive a civilisation that had utterly passed away, nor with the
deliberate neglect of the modern world, and its most intense and living
art--Music. Johnstone had not much mediæval sense, and was sparing in
his appreciation of Rossetti, to whom he became unjust. What he liked
best was "Jenny," though he was rightly critical on the unsound streaks
in its rhetoric. It was first brought home to him, as to others of his
group, by the skilful and dramatic reading, in a singular clanging
voice, of his chief Keble friend, C. W. Pettit: a young man of high and
melancholy character who was found drowned, probably by accident, in the
Upper River, near Oxford, in the spring of 1882. A memorial stone with
Pettit's initials marks the place, in an unfrequented reach of the
stream, and the inscription, if not effaced, is now a mystery except to
some few who remember him.

"Jenny" also struck upon what may be mentioned now as the deepest chord
in Johnstone's sympathies; it is heard sounding in the letters, quoted
below, that review the stories of Ruth, Fantine, and Tess of the
D'Urbervilles. His attitude in this matter was free from conventional
ethics, and was, therefore, essentially Christian; and the relations of
society to technically errant women, who have lapsed even once by
accident, preoccupied him bitterly, and that in no theoretical or
sequestered way. In his own gipsy experience, he witnessed at least one
instance where the issue only just escaped disaster. He was haunted by
the story, as De Quincey was by that of his lost companion in Oxford
Street. The girl whom Johnstone, though generally hard up, managed to
befriend in his secret, chivalrous and effectual fashion, finally
married some one decent and respectable. Concealing the place and
circumstance, he afterwards cast the incident of the "Fantine of
Shotover" (we also conceal, of course, the name of the village) into a
kind of prose sketch or _poème_, which he finished when he was about
twenty-six, re-wrote twice, and thought of printing. It is unfortunately
not now to be traced. Its musical, exalted prose, if inexperienced in
form, gave genuine promise in that kind of composition; but he never to
our knowledge, pursued the vein, and the prose in which he became expert
was, apart from his letters, purely critical and expository. Still,
enough has been said to show the force and unusual bent of Johnstone's
human sympathies. It is clear that a young man's truth of instinct and
strength of head are never more hardly taxed than when he is confronted
with a concrete story of this kind. He may become foolish in opposite
ways, especially if he is also an artist and has strength of
temperament. He may be personally entangled through his sympathies, and
make ill worse. He may be superior, and spoil everything by clumsy
missionary benevolence, hard of hand. It is something if he can get
behind the ordinary, blind, damnatory formulæ of society. This however,
is not so difficult to a free mind. What is harder is to do it, and yet
to see the facts without mere theorising, without the cumber of
rhetorical and literary sentiment that obscures them. A Scotch-descended
brain is useful at this point. In our memory Johnstone rose to the
occasion thus presented, and acted and judged with balance. But we are
more concerned now with the road by which he arrived at his force of
sympathy. Æstheticism of the rootless academic kind had, it is evident,
no hold upon him; he was too angry to be precious; but his motive power
at bottom was that of the artist, as it was surely not that of the
radical theorist or philanthropic organiser; although it was, if we use
accurate language, by no means less human than theirs. What was at work
was his sense of beauty; of physical beauty, first of all, or of grace,
in the victimised person, as the sign and vesture of an originally sound
and simple, or gay and innocently festal nature; beauty inbred, and then
marred by some rough contact, and then marred more by social punishment,
and seldom retrieved, even in part--as in the particular instance it
chanced to be retrieved--by any fortunate and final escape. All this
revolts the deepest of human feelings, which distinguishes us from most
of the beasts, namely the æsthetic feeling, which at this point happens
to coincide closely with the religious. A certain depth and rarity were
thus super-added to the plain good feeling and kindliness of the man;
and we can draw these facts from the jealous hiding-place of the past
without undue violence to the shyness in which he wrapped them, as they
show his personal and special path of approach to the human tragedy, and
may even come to the notice of, and serve for the encouragement of
similar minds at a corresponding stage of discontent. We may now go back
to his early youth, when he was halfway through Oxford, and when some of
these ideas were germinating into necessarily crude expression, which
none the less has its interest. In a letter of 1881, he writes:--

"How can we escape from Swinburne? Does not modern society drive one to
his school, at least the sort of society that I am _supposed_ to have
been brought up in, whose moral atmosphere is a sort of perpetual
afternoon tea, where all the men are pale young curates and the women
district visitors, their excitements vulgar ritualistic tea-pot
tempests, the doctrinal significance of birettas, purificators.... Their
minds ever on the alert to quash the smallest expression of any delight
in natural beauty--'beauty is only skin-deep,' the damnedest lie that
was ever formulated (compare Browning's Paracelsus). I wish with Gautier
that I had been born in the days of the Roman Empire, when asceticism
was almost unknown and what there was of it entirely specialised, before
ever such an astounding classification as the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil had been made, or every natural beauty writhed, like the divine
feminine torso, in the accused grip of fashion." These are the
outpourings of a very young man only twenty. It may fairly be said that
Johnstone was always far more of an ascetic, personally, than he ever
admitted, and the articles on Bach and Sir Edward Elgar abundantly prove
the religious habit of mind induced by the training and associations of
his early years. A year later his views have become better balanced, as
shown by the following extract from a letter on the same subject.

"I read most of the _Apologia_ a month or two back. As you say, Newman
stands quite alone in his sincerity and spiritual power, the only
orthodox thinker who is not an instance of self-deception resulting from
reiterated untruth. All the purest and most beautiful aspects of the old
faith seem to group round him. But the lights are almost out on the
stage where he poses so magnificently, a rough crowd is spoiling all the
scenic illusion, and garish sunbeams are coming in through the roof.

"I was moved to tears the day before yesterday by the appearance in this
place [Tunbridge Wells] of a pretty face.

"There she was, a radiant and triumphant vindication of human nature
among the myriad libels on the human form.

"I love the wonderful human body. How utterly the most beautiful of
imaginable things in its strange dualism; perfect form expressed with
infinite subtlety in two mutually supplemental phases. The one--tall,
lithe-limbed, and athletic, with its shifting net-work of muscles
beneath the clear brown skin, boldly chiselled features and short crisp
hair--emblem of strength and swiftness and godlike protection, buoyant
and fearless; the other--a harmony of exquisite curves, white and
sensitive, and crowned with rippling hair, fulfilled of tender life and
wondrous grace--living type of fruitfulness. To say that either deviated
from the abstract perfection of form is merely to say the very idea of
sex is such a deviation; and is there not a certain divine
suggestiveness in this very fact? Their union is perfect Beauty--veils
of the great human Sacrament. And all this is faded clean out of modern
life. The belief in the body is dead. I believe some of us live and die
never knowing the likeness of the human form, just as some of us do
without ever seeing the sunrise.

"The 'pale Galilean' has banished Beauty; and only here and there,
disguised almost beyond recognition, has it ventured with infinite
apology to return.... Yet let us not be all unthankful to the pale
Galilean and his lessons of suffering; there are too many of us who see
in their own instincts the very impress of impossibility to be
satisfied, who have to reflect with some bitterness, not '_il faut
mourir_,' but '_il faut vivre_' and gather up our scraps and skulk
along, hoping, perhaps, some day for a lowly place in some court in the
House of Life, if it be only that of a scullion. And then at what a
frightful cost have those lessons become part of the world's
inheritance! Surely it cannot have been for nothing."

Obviously, in all this outburst, if its literary and intellectual
origins are not hard to trace, there was no pose whatever; it was a mood
that Johnstone honestly and passionately lived through, or rather it
remained as a background to his nature. He was far from happy at this
period. He had many friends and varied interests, but he felt that life
was being wasted; in fact he had not "found himself," nor was he to do
so until his visit to Germany. No doubt Keble was not the college for
one of his temperament, and the English system of teaching the classics
made them, for him, dead languages indeed; but had their oral use been
encouraged (the practice of the late Professor Blackie) it is possible
that he might have taken a real interest in them. With one of his
friends he would speak constantly in Latin.

During the next few years Johnstone was mainly engaged in scholastic
work, and the necessity of earning his own living prevented him from
taking his degree. In a letter of September 1885, he regrets that he
"had to live much in continuous utter rebellion against outward
circumstances. In the morning is much strife and crying; in the evening,
comfort of the pot. The Day of Rest brings loneliness in
crowds--'stalled oxen and hatred.' _Ca finira._"

In the spring of 1887 he inherited a small legacy, which set him free,
for a time, from the drudgery of teaching, and enabled him to carry out
his long-deferred wish for a course of serious musical study at a
foreign conservatorium. At this period he knew absolutely no German, and
had only a fair knowledge of French, and was quite unconscious of
possessing the natural gift for modern languages, which he was
afterwards to turn to good account at the Edinburgh Academy and
elsewhere. In August he went to Kreuznach to acquire the elements of
German before proceeding to the Cologne Conservatorium, where he had
determined to study. The family where he stayed could speak no English
and but little French, so he was forced from the outset to express
himself in a strange tongue and make shift to understand it. Early in
October he entered the Conservatorium as a student, and engaged himself
to take the year's course. His chief friend was M. Sidney Vantyn, now
Professor of the Piano at the Liège Conservatoire, and then in his last
year of study. They met in the class of Professor Eibenschütz, one of
the most severe masters there, who made no allowance for Johnstone's
previous amateur training, and was rather harsh and discouraging. He
knew no English and Johnstone's German was still elementary, so Vantyn,
who knew English thoroughly, acted as interpreter between them. In his
recollections of those days M. Vantyn writes:--

"It was certainly evident that he had never had a musical training
before his arrival in Cologne. Johnstone's fingers were stiff and he had
to begin almost at the very beginning. And this he had the courage to
do. At that time I was one of the advanced pupils, I offered to help,
and for some months we practised together every day, more especially
with a view to developing the fingers. In April, 1888, he showed me a
sketch of a _Valse de Concert_. This composition was what one would have
expected from Johnstone--bright, original, thorough. At my request he
completed the _Valse_ which I played shortly afterwards at a concert,
where it met with a decided success. A little later it was sold to a
music publisher at Liège. He soon left Herr Eibenschütz for Dr.
Klauwell, with whom he studied the piano and harmony." Among the other
professors at the Conservatorium were Humperdinck, afterwards famous as
the composer of _Hansel und Gretel_, and Gustav Jensen, the brother of
the better-known song writer.

At length, Johnstone was living in a world which brought out his best
qualities and stimulated his keenest interests. But he now realised that
he had come ten years too late for the attainment of any eminence,
either as executant or composer, and contented himself with considerably
extending his general knowledge of music. Nor did he ever confine his
attention to music alone; but he endeavoured to see as much as possible
of German methods of work, especially as regards the teaching of
languages. In reading the Cologne verdict on Johnstone's early training
it must be remembered that in his youth the piano was not well taught in
England, where the principles and importance of a good technique were
alike unknown. Of course, the principal and all his masters liked him
personally, but naturally their chief interest lay with young pupils who
promised to make a name in the musical world. The year's course at the
Conservatorium ended in July, and about this time he writes:--

"As regards intentions, I am quite resolved now (and quite contented) to
become a modern language teacher for life. During this year I have
obtained some insight into the musical profession, with the conclusion
that for all but the very few of quite the first rank it is a wretched
life. So I am after all going to take my degree, and shall reside next
term as a member of Balliol.... I could get a living by music now, but
that would be to sink into a drudgery yet worse than anything I have yet
had to do. I _will_ not teach beginners. Besides, I can make a much
better living in another profession."

Johnstone returned to England at the end of August, 1888, in wonderful
spirits and in better health than he had ever before enjoyed, bursting
with ideas and enthusiasm for everything German. It was Gulliver's
homecoming after the voyage to the Houyhnhnms, and his friends had to
listen to criticism of a similar kind. There is no doubt that this year
brought real maturity to Johnstone. He gained a confidence in himself
and a grip on life, which even when the prospect seemed most hopeless
prevented him from ever again falling into his old moods of despondency.
In October he returned to Oxford. Some years back he had taken his name
off the books of Keble and migrated to New Inn Hall. The Hall had lately
been absorbed by Balliol, and so in the end Johnstone became a member
of the College which should have sheltered him from the beginning. In
Balliol he was tolerably well at home, though now senior to the men
around him. He forgathered with Farmer, who had just left Harrow for
Balliol and with the Master's support arranged a concert in the Hall
every Sunday evening. Once he gave a conjuring show, by Farmer's
request. Jowett shrilled in cherubic mirth, sent for Johnstone, listened
to his conversation, which flowed more easily than that of most of
Jowett's undergraduate visitors and was of another stamp; and continued
to treat him with politeness. Johnstone, whose classics had somewhat
rusted during his stay in Germany, read with Mr. St. George Stock, the
philosophical writer, then and since a well-known private teacher in
Oxford. In December he passed the necessary schools and took his degree;
his last experience of the old, disquieting city was pleasant, if
brief--a period of _recueillement_ before embarking upon the new career
which he had chosen.

In the March following, 1889, he received an offer to go as tutor to the
young son of Prince Abamélek in Podolia, a province of Southern Russia.
The following account of his journey is interesting:--

"I left Berlin on Thursday morning at 8.30; the stage through Galicia,
Oswiecim, Cracow, Lemberg, Podwoloczyska was a bad twenty-four hours.
Just at the frontier the snow was immensely deep, standing in a wall on
each side of the train. It was like being let into Russia through the
works of a great snow fortification. The worst mistake I made was in
bringing no victuals with me. I noticed at the frontier examination that
my portmanteau was the only one not half full of food. The restaurants
at the large junctions are excellent, being all under the management of
Tartars, a race possessing the genius of cookery, but if you have to
wait as I did, more than twenty-four hours at an out-of-the-way country
station, you may find nothing obtainable but tea. Travelling in Russia
is in any case tiring; the distances are interminable, and every journey
has to be regarded as a sort of pilgrimage. On coming from Osipoffka
here, we had to leave about ten in the evening to meet the desired
train.

"The start was rather amusing, for we were a considerable caravan with
children, servants, horses and dogs. All night we drove across the
Steppe, accompanied by several mounted men with torches, which they
lighted when the way was bad.

"I had an outside place and was somewhat dazed and curried by the wind
and dust by the time we got to the station. Railway travelling is
interesting if you have got the courage not to go first class. The
carriages are on the American plan, with an opening down the middle.
Instead of dapper bagmen you find long-coated and long-haired Jews,
besides soldiers and students in curious costumes, while whole families,
travelling together, produce the effect of an emigrant convoy. Everyone
undresses with complete _sang-froid_.

"The family always come for the summer to this estate. It lies in a
well-wooded district of Podolia, some hundred miles further north than
the region to which I first went. The house is very large, and the
garden magnificent. It is skirted by a river and there are primitive
boats and an excellent bathing place. They have also a steam-launch of
English manufacture, which is shortly to be got afloat.

"The neighbourhood is a paradise of Gipsies. The river throws out arms
and endless windings, and the ground between is much broken and covered
with undergrowth. Here the Gipsies encamp. One sees them in the evening
bathing with their horses, and thus I had an opportunity of observing a
thing, the peculiar and suggestive appropriateness of which is remarked
on by Darwin in his 'Voyage of the Beagle,' namely, a naked man on a
naked horse. This is the true centaur; they become one thing. I am now
convinced that the Gipsies are the most physically beautiful of all
races. In England they are abject beggars, but here rather more
well-to-do than the average of the population; for they are not like the
peasants, more than half-starved by ecclesiastical regulation, and
obviously, in a country in such a stage as Russia is at present, they
have a better time. There are plenty of immense regions where they can
trap and fish quite unmolested, and the climate favours their mode of
life--doubly, I should imagine, the winter giving a short account of
defective constitutions. I suppose they are thieves, but to the casual
observer they are entirely admirable. Troops of splendid little brown
children go about in the evening singing or shrieking with shrill
laughter. Their music, by the way, is valued in Russia. There are
several troops who get large sums for attending various festivities.

"It has gradually been borne in upon me that the climate of this region
is almost ideal. The sky is deep blue and far off, yet the heat is never
really oppressive, on account of a constant breeze which brings balsam
from the woods. For the landscape a finer contrast could scarcely be
found to the Southern Steppe, which is like the burnt and scraped
bottom of a pot. It has a character of its own, of course. From the fact
of being usually able to see to the level horizon in all directions, it
reminds one of the sea, while in summer the heated and quivering air
which rises from the ground produces marvellous atmospheric effects; but
there is always a wind, skin-drying and far from healthy. Here, on the
other hand, we are well watered and surrounded by deep and lordly
forest, and the aspect of the whole country is _riant_.

"I have not yet seen much of the _kirchliches Wesen_. The priest at
Osipoffka, I gathered, is a man who has to get in a mass as often as he
is sober enough. The Abaméleks do not receive him, and never go to
Church while there. In any case, I do not think the Princess is
particularly _dévote_. She is of Polish descent, and her family having
given up Western Catholicism, have never become, I suppose, enthusiastic
as Russian orthodox.

"Of the children the boy is much the most interesting. The eldest girl,
though not without promise of beauty, is at present in a somewhat gaping
and lumbering stage. The younger one is much smaller, though only a
little younger than her sister, also of better intelligence, if worse
temper. She laughs with a curious _abandon_ and is full of
_câlineries_, and is two totally different persons when pleased and
bored.

"Master Paul has not the faintest resemblance that I can trace to either
of them. He is an exceptionally round-limbed and well-made child, with
low forehead and hair like dead-black fur showing a dead-white skin
between, tending to stand up though perfectly soft, and always with a
backward sweep, as though he had lately stood facing a high wind; beady
brown eyes, clear brown colour, delicate little nose and chin and a
mouth like a cherry, make up a face which is no false promise of his
vivacity of temperament. It changes in the hundredth part of a second
from bubbling laughter to a sort of Last Judgment seriousness.

"He wags his little _tête de Polichinelle_ over his victuals, and
converses with them in several languages. Sometimes his mother
interrupts him and asks if he knows what he is saying, when he swears
that he hasn't spoken for a quarter of an hour. _Pauvre petit bijou_ she
calls him."

In the autumn of 1889 his engagement as tutor ended, and he spent the
winter in Odessa to study the language. He put himself, as usual, under
conditions where it was impossible to speak any other language; entered
a Russian family; prepared his questions in Russian when he shopped;
and addressed in Russian the official who delayed his necessary papers
until he had silently put down a bribe of two roubles, and who then
shook him warmly by the hand. He was full of tales; he told of the
English journalist, so aggressively and deliberately English that he
would not uncover before the Tsar's portrait in a hairdresser's shop; of
the Prince Abamélek, who was always talking of taking him out shooting,
but never did so; of the Princess, who feared that her little Paul was
"trop jeune encore pour profiter de son esprit eminemment cultivé"; of
the social tyranny of Russian orthodoxy, which drove free-thinking
persons of quality in the country to church and sacrament at all the
Christian festivals; and, finally, of his shortness of funds which
forced him to find his way home in humble style.

As an English liberal, Johnstone was naturally a welcome guest in the
society of the Reform party; and on his return to England he was to meet
Stepniak at the house of their common friend, York Powell, and to enroll
himself among the Friends of Russian Freedom. But he was more in
sympathy with the members of the Reform movement than with their
objects. While in Russia, such connections secured him a mild
surveillance on the part of the officials, and he had a little
difficulty in obtaining the necessary passport to leave the country; but
these vexations did not prevent him from holding that a paternal
government was required in Russia, and that his countrymen as a whole
were to blame for their harsh judgment of a civilisation merely because
it ran counter to their own political ideals. The late Bishop Creighton
arrived at precisely the same conclusion after his visit to Russia to
attend the Coronation in 1896.

On his way home he spent some months in Buda-Pesth, Vienna, and the
Tyrol, and made his first visit to Bayreuth and the Passion Play at
Oberammergau.

Shortly after his return to England Johnstone accepted a mastership in
Modern Languages at the Edinburgh Academy, where his elder brother had
been a classical master for some years. He came into residence in
September, 1890, and Edinburgh was his home until he left that city for
Manchester, in January, 1896. On the whole he was happy there; for
though teaching foreign languages to boys is rather a thankless task, he
was cheered from time to time by the successes of his pupils in
examinations elsewhere, mainly those for entrance to Woolwich and
Sandhurst. He could even confess, after a long summer holiday on the
Continent, that "he was again thoroughly penetrated with the atmosphere
of gray old long-faced Sawbath-keeping Edinburgh." After all, Johnstone,
though he considered himself an Englishman, was, as may be gathered from
his name, Scotch on his father's side; his mother, too, had a strain of
Scotch blood. So perhaps that quiet self-contained manner and all that
it implied came to him from north of the Tweed.

About this time, he was penetrated with the excellent purpose of
training his bodily nerve. He knew that he could never be noticeably
muscular, or anything more than wiry, with his light frame and high
tension. But he would say, "we ought to be able to see a man fall from a
high scaffolding on to the pavement, just before our feet, battered, and
to do whatever is necessary without turning a hair." Accordingly, though
himself most sensitive to pain and to the sight of it, he fraternised
with the young doctors and surgeons whom he met, accompanied them to
operations, watched the worst things, and even gave his help, which was
more than once invited owing to his deftness and neatness of handling.
In this way he got over any shrinking of the nerves. In Edinburgh he
also managed to find some amusement. He was a foreigner in his
adaptiveness to restaurant life, and found a quiet French café to his
taste, where he took his visitors. The odd stratification of Edinburgh
society into the various aristocracies of the country, University,
professions and commerce, and its broad Scotch democratic feeling,
entertained him. He was in one emergency summoned as French interpreter
in the police court, and was pleased at having given satisfaction to
himself and the magistrate, as the case was a somewhat delicate one and
demanded nicety of expression. York Powell, writing to a friend in June,
1893, spoke of Johnstone as

     "a fine fellow, very interesting; a musician doomed for the sins of
     others (for he is not a great sinner) to be a dominie in Edinboro',
     where he is consoled by an old Frenchman who can talk and
     understand; and they have, with one or two more, a little French
     club. Each pays sixpence a night for expenses, and you have simple
     refreshments and sound conversation."

Above all, his musical opportunities were good and varied, and he took
the fullest advantage of them. Music in Edinburgh had, for many years,
maintained a high standard. The orchestral concerts were second only to
those conducted by Hallé and Richter; the latter brought his own band
occasionally, and every solo player of eminence came there from time to
time. He found many congenial friends, and was a frequent guest at the
houses of Mrs. Sellar, the widow of the Professor of Humanity at
Edinburgh, and Dr. Berry Hart, the famous surgeon, where musical
amateurs met constantly; and he was a member of the "Rhyme and Reason
Club," where literary and artistic questions were discussed.

His most noteworthy contribution to the Club was a paper on the
"Relation of Music to the Words in Songs," which he afterwards read at
the Manchester College of Music, and which well merits a summary here
(and some extracts). It shows how his mind was steadily working in the
direction of musical criticism. Its origin was a statement made in a
paper on Tennyson's songs, that poetry, if it be true poetry, is
self-sufficient, and the addition of music to it, however fine the music
may be in itself, is an intrusion and a disturbance for the true lover
of poetry.

The first part of his paper is concerned with an examination into the
nature of music and its place among the arts. He goes on to deplore the
divorce between music and the songs of modern English poets, none of
which are capable of being sung, and traces this divergence back to the
days when Puritanism banished music from church and village green.
Burns, he adds, wrote genuine songs; but he is the only song-writer
since the days of Elizabeth, and worthy of being ranked with Heine. He
concludes by claiming for music "that it is not an inferior art, a mere
hand-maid to poetry, but a direct revelation of the principle of beauty
and on a footing of honourable equality with poetry. The songs of all
the really great lyrical poets are obviously and radiantly singable, and
meant to be sung, and in their authors' lifetime they were sung. So far
then from the finest lyrical poetry being impaired by association with
music, it is only the maimed poetry of decadence that does not admit of
such association, one unfailing mark of a lyric of the highest order
being that it rises to the true singing quality." In the following
passage Johnstone sets forth the ideal at which the composer of songs
should aim:--

"The great German song composers, such as Schubert, Schumann, Franz and
Brahms, working in profound sympathy with the 'Volkslied,' have arrived
at a conception of the song infinitely richer, more refined, and more
genial than is to be found elsewhere. With Franz and Schumann we find
that, in the best cases, the music positively furnishes a sort of
literary criticism on the text, with such exquisite exactness does the
composer appreciate the text and supply the appropriate musical
counterpart.

"We often hear of the music being _wedded_ to the words of a song, and
it is very curious to find so wonderfully neat and perfect a metaphor
being used by people who are far from suspecting its perfection. This is
in fact, precisely what takes place when a good song is composed--the
music is _wedded_ to the verse, though the expression is often used by
those who think that the music has nothing to do but to express again,
more forcibly perhaps, whatever feeling is expressed by the verse, who
think, in other words, that the music is enslaved, not wedded, to the
poetry.

"But music is not restricted to the expression of the feeling of certain
verses or of any other feeling or feelings. The poetry and the music
have each their independent character and their measure of independent
beauty, and this independent beauty and character is in no sense
destroyed by the union. The music has far more to do than merely express
again or emphasise whatever feeling is expressed by the verse. It may
accompany the verse, adorn the verse, brighten the verse, show up the
character of the verse in a new light, and, in turn, be much improved
by the association; but on the other hand, if destitute of independent
beauty, the music can never become beautiful by being _wedded_ to
something.

"It will now have become clear, what according to the view of music that
I have endeavoured to explain, is the task of a song composer. He has
far more to do than to express again in tones the feeling of the song.
He has to furnish a composition that, in the first place, has life; and,
in the domain of art, to have life is to have beauty.

"Secondly, it must have no incompatibility of temperament with the text,
but must be such as can once for all be wedded to the text with happy
results.

"It is needless to say that a composer who takes this view, or has a
subconscious appreciation of the facts on which this view is based, will
not, if he cares for his text, be satisfied with the first outworn
rubbish that comes to hand, by way of musical setting. He will regret
whatever is totally wanting in naturalness and freshness.

"He will not, like the composer of drawing-room ballads, capture some
wretched cadence, threadbare with much use, and trick it out, dragging
up the melody into long high notes, crowing and shouting as though he
had discovered America, whereas all he has really discovered is an old
shoe lying by the roadside that once, perhaps, belonged to a prince, but
after being stolen by the valet was given to a beggar, and so through a
succession of beggars, the last of whom left it by the side of the high
road."

Johnstone's interest in music was becoming more and more intense. In the
intervals of his school work he composed a Gavotte which had a quaint
origin. He was one day in a music publisher's shop in Edinburgh, when he
saw a gavotte on the counter which had won a prize of £5 or £10 offered
by the firm for the best composition in gavotte form submitted to them.
"And is this your prize gavotte?" said Johnstone, "Well, if I couldn't
compose a better gavotte than that in the time it takes to write it down
I should think _even_ worse of myself than I do." "Why then," said the
representative of the firm, "go home and compose your gavotte, we will
publish it if we take it and give you the same money as this
prize-winner got." Johnstone went home and composed it, and the firm
carried out their promise.

His few compositions were nearly always actually produced and completed
under some sudden pressure from outside. Left to himself, his critical
impulse was always stronger than his productive; he became dissatisfied
and dropped the thing he was working at. His friend, the well-known
singer, Fritz Hedmondt, having obtained from him a promise to arrange a
certain song, let matters drop until the concert date was fixed and the
programmes printed with the song announced "arranged by Mr. Arthur
Johnstone." He then forwarded the programme to Johnstone with the
observation that, of course, the thing had to be done. And it was done,
in twenty-four hours, and was a beautiful and original bit of
harmonization. He also set several songs, which, like the gavotte, met
with the approval of Prof. F. Niecks, and were the main subjects of a
fairly regular correspondence with Vantyn. In one of these letters he
gives an appreciation of the pianoforte piece he most admired.

"About Schumann's Etudes Symphoniques I can only say this: For a long
time past I have privately held the opinion that the work is on the
whole, the finest composition for pianoforte solo in existence. This
will no doubt seem to you exaggerated, but such is my feeling about it.
The extraordinary wealth of imaginative beauty in those variations I
believe to be quite without parallel. Just think of that last variation
before the finale. There is nothing else in music which bears even the
faintest resemblance to it."

Every summer he spent several weeks on the continent, and it was on one
of these visits that he first made the acquaintance of Nietzsche's
philosophy, which was then hardly known in England though beginning to
be talked of in Scotland under the influence of Dr. Tille of Glasgow.

In December, 1903, he writes to Miss Sellar:--

"The author of _Schopenhauer als Erzicher_ is Friedrich Nietzsche. I
suppose you will no more agree with the point of view than with
Sudermann's; for, in fact, the point of view of the two writers is
practically identical, but I do not think you can fail to recognise the
extraordinary originality and force, and, above all, the magnificent
honesty of Nietzsche.

"Have you not noticed that most serious-minded and well-intentioned
people in our day go about with a revised table of the virtues, saying
'truth' when they mean a certain group of optimistic delusions; saying
'courage' for readiness in accepting and energy in reiterating such
delusions, and persistency in closing the eyes to all those facts of
life which do not harmonise with them.

"So far as my experience goes, the only people in our day who say and
admit the truth to the best of their lights are the disciples of
Schopenhauer--Ibsen, Tolstoi, Zola, Sudermann, Nietzsche.

"No doubt you will regard this statement with my 'personal equation'
looming large. I mean you will consider there is no more in it than that
these are the teachers with whom I happen to agree. But I shall be
surprised if you do not admit Nietzsche's honesty and the
extraordinarily searching and luminous character of his thought."

If Johnstone had been put through the mangle of the Honour School called
"Greats," it might have left him superciliously deaf to Nietzsche. As it
was, being without philosophic training, but deeply sensitive to any
new, articulate and daring voice, as well as perfectly at home in
German, he found in Nietzsche a liberating and refreshing power. And
then his personal experiences disposed him to accept the main thesis of
Nietzsche's philosophy that mankind, owing to the teachings of
Christianity, had sacrificed the future of the race to over-much care
for the weaker brethren. At the same time he kept his head, and signed
no vow of submission to Nietzsche. The review of Tille's translation,
well bears partial reprinting in this volume for its keen intelligence
and also as a quite early sketch of the Nietzschian system in the
English press. It was one of the first articles written by Johnstone for
the _Manchester Guardian_, and makes us regret, unwisely no doubt, that
his mind was to be absorbed more and more in music.

Yet, in spite of that absorption, he was as deeply interested as ever in
literature and the drama, when dealing with the most serious issues and
problems of life. The purely technical and executive side of these arts
appealed less to him, and so, to take one instance, he soon outgrew his
early enthusiasm for Swinburne, wondered "whether he ever actually gets
there," and was even too severe in revulsion. Intentional obscurity
irritated him. Mallarmé and his school he would not attempt to
understand. His suspicions indeed were well founded, for at the last
Mallarmé in his lecture on "La Musique et les Lettres" had arrived at
forecasting a new future for music when the sound and rhythm of words
would replace the more clumsy and material tones of instruments.

Browning and Meredith repelled him by their style, though they attracted
him by their subjects and method of treatment. Some of his letters on
literature can be quoted here, as this side of his gifts is little
represented in reviews. It will be seen that he talks less of the style
and form, than of the temper and insight of the three great romancers,
Meredith, Hugo, and Hardy. He is still intent, as they are, on the
special kind of subject, "man's inhumanity to women," which we have seen
absorbing him. Meredith was not widely read in Oxford in the early
eighties by the younger men, though he had always had a small and
impassioned public there since 1870. In our time he was rarely quoted.
He was too strong for tender youth; and any "scholar" or worshipper of
pure form or arbiter of elegancies could preach on Meredith's harshness
and quaintness, and wish that he were more considerately feeble.
Johnstone's tone when at twenty-five, in 1886, he writes of Meredith is
decisive enough, though his words would now be taken as a repetition of
the obvious.

"Rhoda Fleming," he writes, "left me with increased wonder that its
author has not a more generally recognised position. He is the only
living English prose-writer with a real mind-kingdom of his own. The
story moves like fate--as inevitably, as cruelly (the white sacrifice!),
but just misses being dramatic. Why does he not write a play? He could;
perhaps something better than has been done for centuries."

A year earlier he had written:--"When you say Hugo is 'so false' you
must mean not quite practical. Mrs. Gaskell's 'Ruth' is 'false' if you
like, as well as irrelevant. Its real tendency is the reverse of the
authoress' ostensible purpose. The woman becomes a partner in a union
perfectly unpolluted and humane, but unauthorised, and even this is made
inevitable. The Quaker element then turns it into tragedy, and the
climax is effected by a person who is a sufficiently remarkable instance
of a figure created by an apostle of mild propriety. He would have upset
the whole scheme of the Redemption by making the good Jesus sin the sin
of hate. This worthy, but rather Pharisaical Methodist--this large-boned
man of substance who makes responses louder than anyone else--this
nameless monster, whose foul-mouthed brawling on discovery of the
woman's history while under him as a governess, is made the insult in
answer to which her protector produces the _plea_ (which is the purpose
of the book); who, perhaps, takes his place as the best type in fiction
of the most hateful character that the varying conditions of climate and
creed ever yet conspired to produce on this, God's flowery earth--comes
duly in for his share in the comprehensive wash-brush at the finish. By
the simple expedient of turning his hair from black to white he is
qualified for service at the heroine's peaceful tomb, where he joins in
dropping the charitable tear.

"The beautiful touches in this work are the seal of its futility,
arising as they do from the character of Ruth--an impossible incarnation
of all the virtues and graces--a sort of virgin mother, at last in fact
a crowned saint; and I cannot believe in her story, perhaps from being
too young. It may be that the remembrance of Ruth and other such works,
while reading Fantine, misled me; that the escape from the high-pew and
hassock flavour of Methodism to Hugo's 'prophetic soul of the wide
world' blinded. Yet, when a work like 'Les Misérables,' with the
prodigious activity of its dramatic impulse, takes in its sweep the
story of Fantine, something may surely be expected, if ever a writer is
to be adequate on such a subject, and, I cannot but think, rightly. The
'eternal Priestess of Humanity blasted for the Sins of the
People'--Fantine is just the thought dramatised.

"Essentially hopeless and inexorable, surpassing the limit of horror
permissible in art.... And still the nameless agonies of the martyr's
death are forgotten for the angel-benediction at her grave. And is it
nothing to have achieved that this benediction should have been
possible after such a life?...

"Yes, 'Les Misérables,' notwithstanding incidental impossibilities,
albeit ever in extremes, looms in my mind as incomparably the greatest
thing in fiction with which I am acquainted, and the longer ago it gets
since I read it and the more I read, the stronger this impression grows.
It seemed to me that the touches of truth in this 'false' work were
quite fearful in their power; such, for instance, of that gang of
convicts being jolted by in the van, 'their heads knocking together.' He
produces the physical effects of actual presence at what he describes.
Of course, it violates every possible canon from the 'Unities'
downwards; in fact, it might almost be made the basis of a new law of
multiplicities."

Some years later, in 1892, he wrote his impression on reading Hardy's
masterpiece: "I have just finished 'Tess of the D'Urbervilles.' You may
have noticed a passage in Vol. I. running thus (chap. xvi.):--'Long
thatched sheds stretched round the enclosure, their slopes encrusted
with vivid green moss, and their eaves supported by wooden posts rubbed
to a glossy smoothness by the flanks of infinite cows and calves of
bygone years, _now passed to an oblivion almost inconceivable in its
profundity_.'

"If a man speaks so of _cattle_ how must he feel towards his human
brothers and sisters! How strong must be in him that profoundest of
poetic passions, the '_carent quia vate sacro_' feeling! For, no doubt,
sometimes in these quiet country places a heart of such gold as Tess's
throbs away in complete obscurity its allotted number of pulses. Our
temper has altered from the time when this emotion was dismissed with a
'Let not ambition mock their useful toil,' etc., and Hardy has fully
realised the appalling paths of such tragedies in humble life. 'This
time,' he seems to have said, 'this time no mincing and no hedging. Let
the disdainful smilers and those others who shift all responsibilities
on to Providence look to themselves.'

"There are passages of infinite pathos in this story: the 'too-late'
meeting of Tess with Angel Clare in the sea-side lodging, and the
terrific scene immediately after, when Angel is gone and she is left to
sob out her distraction; where Tess says to Angel, 'Why didn't you stay
and love me when I was sixteen with my little sisters and
brothers?':--the long letter she writes about a year after Angel has
left her, and where she practises the ballads that he had liked best,
while working in the field, 'the tears running down her cheeks all the
while at the thought that, perhaps, he would not after all come to hear
her, and the silly words of the songs resounding in painful mockery of
the aching heart of the singer.' And, earlier, the baptising by Tess of
her own infant, and--perhaps lying nearest of all to the fountain of
tears--those glimpses of her early innocence. 'Tess's pride would not
allow her to turn her head again to learn what her father's meaning was,
if he had any, and thus she moved on with the whole body to the
enclosure where there was to be dancing on the green' ... when one knows
against what fate the poor girl is going! But is it not all just a
little too cruel? To represent such adorable goodness, and sweetness,
and faithfulness as being rewarded with the actual _gibbet_--is not this
a little hard, even on Providence? The unsparingly tragic ending is not
the only thing, nor even the main thing that distinguishes this from
other stories dealing with the same sort of subject.

"In George Eliot's Hetty we evidently have to do with a character quite
other than Tess's. The imputation of depravity attached to the fact that
Hetty, when scarcely more than a child, looked long in the glass and
thought how fine it would be to be a lady--this seems to me an
exceedingly miserable evidence of the somewhat crude vice of character
by which, notwithstanding George Eliot's immense genius, her sympathy
with the simple-hearted was, in certain cases, marred or destroyed. But
Hetty's character must be taken as it is revealed in action and
intention, and she abandons her infant, whereas the soul of Tess goes
out in an agony of endeavour to preserve hers, and, long after its
death, she exposes herself to ridicule by tending its outcast's grave.
In Hetty's dreams and schemes, again no thought of her parents and
people or hope of bettering their lot has place, while Tess at the
darkest moment of her _via dolorosa_--at Stonehenge, just before God
finally forsakes her--thinks of her sister 'Liza-Lu, and secures a
protector for those she is leaving behind.

"Scott is, of course, without a trace of George Eliot's defect, and
always treats Effie Deans like a gentleman. By certain touches, too, he
indicates how deep is his concern for her, such as that crowd of
blackguards and urchins about the court-house, for whose holiday Effie
was so nearly murdered. But besides the fact that Scott has no true
grasp of feminine character, he makes Jeanie his heroine and never
really undertakes to tell Effie's story. And George Eliot, after
disposing of Hetty in a hurry, actually offers to interest us in the
love affairs of that preaching woman! In Fantine there are details
perhaps more intolerable to hear than this story of Hardy's, but the
general effect is less strong. For partly we distrust Hugo's rhetoric,
and besides, we are beguiled and consoled at the end, however
unreasonably, by his 'fortunately God knows where to look for graves,'
while in 'Tess' the concluding incidents come with a thunderbolt
inevitableness, and at the end nothing stands between us and the hideous
ignominy, the entire forgetfulness, the utter nakedness. But though her
life has become forfeit, perhaps that ignominy of the actual gibbet
might have been spared. In any case, there is nothing to be said at the
end of such a tale but--

Yet let us not find fault, for terrible as it is to find a man who,
discarding the tradition that it is the office of poets to soothe and
amuse their fellow-prisoners with pretty fables and tales of the
governor's beneficence--a man who rejects this almost universal
tradition and appals his hearers with an account of malignant
treacheries committed by that governor--yet I sympathise with the
temper that does this, and believe that it has its roots in a genuine
and manly feeling, the feeling that I tried to suggest at the beginning.

"Hardy is a strong example of that curious, inverted Manichæism so
characteristic of our time--a sort of mediæval horror of the grossness
of matter, balanced by a most unmediæval sense of the utter madness of
insulting and despising matter, seeing that the tyranny of it is
absolute.

"He is perhaps the first Briton to write as a true man of the people on
such a subject, that is to say, to take it quite seriously. His story is
told with such passion that almost every particle of doctrinaire
affectation or easy pattern work is consumed and refined away, and he
has created in Tess the most inexpressibly pathetic figure that I know
of in literature."

About Zola he writes in a letter of July, 1893:--

"Perhaps you have read 'Le Rêve.' It and 'La Debâcle' are the only two
of Zola's longer novels that could be recommended to a lady, and even
the latter with some misgiving. I cannot say that I think 'Le Rêve' one
of Zola's best works. I am far from sure that the French critic who
said: 'Nous préférons Monsieur Zola à quatre pattes' was not in the
right. Nevertheless, there are passages in it stamped by Zola's unique
greatness. With regard to its defects, I would rather say nothing at
present, except one--the end strikes me as absurd, _franchement mauvais
et du placage litteraire_--a recrudescence of something that we have
left far behind, something dead that should have been left to bury its
dead. All the same there are, I think, truly great things in the book."

Of Marie Bashkirtseff, September, 1891, he writes:--

"Concerning Marie Bashkirtseff, she seems to me to have had nearly every
gift except two, namely imagination and heart. Above all, a sort of
critical intuition, which prevented her from ever resting satisfied in
anything second-rate. She was a typical little Russian, small of
stature, dark of tint; in temperament sensitive, romantic, versatile;
unlike the northern Russians, who are prevalently tall and fair and have
a certain contempt for the unpractical. Nearly the whole Russian harvest
of folk-songs and cognate treasure comes from the south, from Cossacks
and little Russians, the true Muscovite being almost a songless bird.
Marie must have had in a high degree the incomparable grace and
distinction of her countrywomen, with that wonderful animation and
'fever of life' which makes the atmosphere of Russian society the
warmest and brightest in the world. As to your statement that 'some of
her failings, like her love of luxury and her desire to be attended to
at all costs, are pure vanity and wormwood,' I have always stuck up for
this barbaric element, and believe that largely on it depends the
prodigious formative power of a _free feminine influence_--that thing of
such rarity as to be almost non-existent in our puritanical society. I
know a man at half a glance who has ever been under it."

Referring to his correspondent's remarks that Russians seem to look at
religious questions like intelligent children, he writes:--

"Did you ever hear of the Soo-ré-ye-vites, the sect of which Leo Tolstoi
is a member?

"Soorayeff was a peasant ignorant of reading and writing. He had read in
church 'God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him must worship Him in
spirit and in truth,' and by pure sympathy and unaided intelligence he
jumped to the conclusion that Jesus Christ meant what He said. Think of
the prodigious freshness of nature and the promise that this shows.

"There are the five hundred sects of Great Britain all accepting the
same fundamental absurdities, and yet this simple man, never having
heard of criticism, is enabled to penetrate the viewless veil, woven by
the years and the churches over the face of the Son of Man, so as to
understand that Christ actually meant that God was a Spirit.

"Suppose a missionary went among a savage tribe and tried to teach them
what Justice is; told them he himself was a son of Justice, and that
Justice was made manifest in him; lastly, that Justice is a spirit.
Suppose he came back after an absence and found the people teaching that
Justice was three persons and burning alive those who did not accept
this view!"

In England, unless it were in London, Johnstone seldom felt at home; in
Scotland, still less. He liked to wander from one easy variegated
foreign city to another, where good music and good plays are quickly
accessible, and British convention is a mere figure in the comic papers.
He valued his friends in Edinburgh, but the place displeased him. He
would sit on Arthur's seat and hate the modern Athens steaming there
below him. Its curious old mossy layers of culture, professional and
academic, could hardly satisfy him, and he quickly got through the moss
to the stone. The ferment of the young "Celtic" writers and painters
seemed to come to little. He did not inure himself to the occasionally
inconsiderate manners of the Lowland Scotch, nor could he bring himself
to repay them steadily in kind. Some of the officials with whom he dealt
appeared to have been born, where they would die, in Gath. He would
hardly agree with, but he could understand the unqualified remark of his
old French associate, "Il n'y a pas d'amour dans ce pays." Probably he
was unjust to Edinburgh; but though his forbears were partly Scotch, he
was not, like Stevenson, born Scotch, and he never really saw the native
character from within. Teaching may not have been the best introduction
to it. He taught well, having the right sort of delivery and insistent
method. But it is disgusting to an artist to teach anything for bread,
except, perhaps, his own craft. The hard work, the pull on the nerves
and patience, can scarcely have strengthened Johnstone's health.

Indeed, wherever he lived he had a touch of the exile. He dwelt really
in some region not of this earth at all, where the masters of music sit
in their Valhalla, where the hard waste matter that makes up most of our
life is eliminated, while the essence of its pain and pleasure is
distilled through art and presented in sublime purity of form. The saint
has his vision of personal goodness, the philosopher his of systematic
truth, the reformer his of a new society. The artist--for the term must
be extended to those who perceive as well as those who produce--has his
ideal vision, which varies in form with his special art. It follows that
the valuable part of actual life, to such a temper, is made up of such
stray hours of vivid experience and intelligence as, taken together,
give some notion of that other world. We had written "moments" instead
of "hours," but the former word would be misleading, with the false
suggestion of fleeting passive sensation, for which Walter Pater, or
rather those who misinterpret him, must answer. Every experience, in
truth, whether moral, sensuous, or intellectual, that is, of real worth,
contributes to the artist's dream. Johnstone posed so little and lived
by this principle so naturally and unwittingly that he could not be
called a doctrinairè. But few men save up their vital impressions about
everything so carefully, engraving them patiently on the memory, and
dismissing the vast mass of experience that tells us nothing. Hence
Johnstone was never quite naturalised in any abode, though he managed to
be sociable and festive when the chances came. In Edinburgh, however,
for the reasons given, he stayed over long, and we may regret that he
was not sooner freed from teaching school.

Practically, there was some compensation for so late an escape. The
teacher's attitude, as of one clearly laying down the law, remained in
much of his press work, and to its advantage. The public as a whole,
though it must not be told so, is like a large, impatient, grumbling,
half-ignorant class of schoolboys. Reviewing is therefore educational
work. Not that the dominie-tone is wanted; for that is the worst of
faults, even in school-teaching! But the teacher does not take his class
into the secret of his own doubts, hesitations, or revulsions; he gives
his results, he gives what he thinks the truth. Or, if a figure from
another calling be preferred, the critic _operates_, beneficently if
often without anæsthetics. Further, there was something to be said for
the late specialisation of Johnstone's ruling talent. His nature was
rich; his articles have the style of a man who has lived, as well as one
who knows his trade. No youth, though ever so clever, could have made
them. He treats music as a means by which all the emotions, whether
large and solemn, or light and happy, or sombre, or perverse, are
transformed, often out of recognition, into their counterparts in sound;
so that the kinds of joy and pain given by music, like those given by
high drama but in a rarer measure, are stripped of any stinging personal
reference, while unweakened in force. The hearer is thus mysteriously
shown, as Rossetti says, the "road he came," and yet has no more, for
the time, to do with himself, save in so far as he is one of a thousand
men to whom the music interprets their experience, widely and deeply.
Therefore, to understand music, a man must have suffered. Johnstone had
met and weathered some of the suffering which an intense nature, even
under conditions easier than his, must absolutely meet with on this
earth, and must either give in to and go under, or must get over and
appropriate--there is no choice! He chose the latter way, being strong
enough, and so became a better musical critic.

Besides, his bent for music was growing more marked during the last
years in Edinburgh. It was clear to his friends what his profession
ought to be, and his chance of adopting it came at the end of 1895. The
musical critic of the _Manchester Guardian_, Mr. Fremantle, died; and it
was hard to find a successor who would stamp his own mark and make the
critical judgments of the paper a power, in the musical capital in the
North of England. Johnstone had already written for the _Manchester
Guardian_ articles of sundry kinds; a review of the translation of
Nietzsche, part of which is reprinted in this book, and a notice on
Tolstoi; as well as on musical matters. York Powell was foremost in
commending his friend to the editor as a man of worth and high special
talent. An offer was sent to Johnstone, which he weighed with even more
than his usual deliberation. He felt the break with his friends in
Scotland, and he had misgivings, being a slow writer and not fond of his
pen, as to his power to work under journalistic conditions. As even his
letters show, he composed carefully and was a master of exact
expression; thus he felt some anxiety at having to work under the
pressure of a time limit, and that too at a late hour. He therefore
sent, without in any way jumping at the offer as an escape from
usherdom, a dignified reply that gave an impression of his quality. It
was not easy for his friends to make him decide with the necessary
haste. In the end he accepted the proposal, much to their relief, and
came to Manchester in January, 1896. There he stayed for the rest of his
life.

In Manchester, Johnstone's existence and outlook were quite altered. He
had not to wait until the daily chare was over before he could turn to
music, which now took up his force and time for the working part of the
year. He had taught well, but others could have done that. Now, for nine
years, he gave himself to the work for which he was built, and which few
could do so well. Certainly no one did it in quite his way. The union of
temperament, knowledge, style, gave him an accent of his own. His lore
and his sensibility always grew and enriched each other. He did not
wholly limit himself to music, and before passing to this his chief
occupation, we may note his activity elsewhere. It was too much to hope
he would have any great distracting interest. Music is enough and more
for one man. But he spared some time for literature. He had a swift
preference even as a boy for all that was fresh, vehement, and strange
in modern drama and fiction. He was not at all like the complacent,
young, up-to-date college tutor, who reads the latest exotic writers,
but remains unaltered. Johnstone, if he liked a play or story at all,
was seized and shaken; a kind of enthusiasm which is a better preface to
a true judgment than any amount of accomplished and balanced coldness,
or the pseudo-"judicial" frame of mind. He was not so fond of poetry, or
so sure in his perception of it, caring too little for purely verbal in
contrast with accompanied or wordless music. We have reprinted above,
however, a part of his lecture on the scientific frontier between the
two arts. He found time also, when the press of the season was over, for
some byplay as a reviewer. He wrote in commanding style about books on
conjuring, on billiards, and on cooking. He used to say that cooking was
his real gift. To go to a certain café and quote Mr. Johnstone's name,
was to ensure a respectful and an even terrified service; and the
well-drilled waiter would commend a particular sauce-bottle as that
which his distinguished customer had used. But he remembered, with more
pleasure than banquets, having slept on shelves with the Cretan rebels
in the mountains, and sharing and digesting their extremely dried fish.
He also wrote on weighty matters outside music; the chief of these were
English and German plays. The companies that travelled from the
Fatherland to the Germanic city of the British Empire, and acted in the
Schiller-Anstalt, often played pieces involving actual dialect.
Johnstone's familiarity with German, as well as his natural sympathy
with writers like Hauptmann (and Sudermann in a less degree), marked him
out as the right reviewer. Plays, like concerts, have to be noticed in
hot haste on the very evening; or, at best, if given on Saturday, by the
following evening; for so much expedition is the minotaur-public of a
daily paper supposed to stipulate. The work done on such terms is not
always the worst in substance, though only long wont can give the kind
of finish or varnish that is desired. The same remark applies to musical
reviewing; but Johnstone's distrust of himself was needless. The result
was more in accordance with the expectation of his friends than with his
own. Many of his articles were written at great speed, and as one of his
colleagues said, if it had been possible for him to wait till he felt he
could do justice to the subject, most of them would never have been
written at all.

Before passing to his main labours as a journalist, we may here quote,
in illustration, part of the notice that he wrote on the _Johannisfeuer_
of Sudermann. Our reprints in this book deal almost wholly with music,
and, as we have said, he thought of music as a comment, at several
removes and after strange distillations, on life and experience. But the
drama, which is a copy of life, not indeed a direct one, but subject to
the laws of theatrical art, also engrossed him, especially when it was
at once modern in form and homely and passionate in theme.

The Bavarian peasants and their girls still jump through the dying
embers of their bonfires on the eve of St. John:--

     _"For the truth is Mr. Parson, a remnant of heathenism stirs in the
     blood of us all. It has persisted through all the centuries since
     ancient Germanic times, and, once a year, it blazes up with the
     fire of St. John's Eve. For that night the spooks of ancient
     heathenism are unchained. Witches ride on broomsticks, instead of
     being beaten with them, and pass through the air, with mocking
     laughter, on their way to the Blocksberg. The Wild Hunt scours over
     the forest and wilder desires over our hearts--all that is most
     frenzied and most utterly doomed to nonfulfilment. No matter what
     the order may be that for the time being reigns in the world, for
     one single heart's desire to be realised, and to give us something
     to live on, a thousand others must go to ruin, not only for the
     ever unattainable, but others, allowed to escape from a hand that
     held them too carelessly. Yes, those bonfires which blaze up--do
     you know what they are? They are the spectres of our heart's
     desires, the red-winged birds of paradise that we might have kept
     by us for life but allowed to escape, the spooks of the old order,
     of the heathenism that is in us. However satisfied we may be in the
     light of day and beneath the reign of law and order, this is St.
     John's Eve in the night sacred to Midsummer Madness. I drink to
     your ancient heathen fires. Let them blaze high! Will no one clink
     glasses with me?"--(Act. iii., sc. 3.)_

"So the title 'Johannisfeuer,' with its double meaning, literal and
symbolical, must be rendered into English--according as we wish to lay
stress on the former or the latter--'The Bonfires of St. John's Eve' or
'Midsummer Madness.' On seeing the remarkably fine performance of this
play the non-German spectator, impressed with the general worthlessness
of German drama since the Augustan age (that is, the age of Goethe and
Schiller), might well wonder how it is possible for a German writer to
produce such a thing--a play, simple and unpretentious in design, yet
fraught through and through with poetic beauty; a play written with
northern sharpness of characteristic and, at the same time, with Italian
warmth, eloquence, and keenness of sympathy with the moods of nature; a
play distinctly Ibsenesque in structure and largely also in style, yet,
for all its sombre colouring, not haggard and aghast, like nearly all
the products of the Scandinavian's demonic spirit. The scene is in a
farm in East Prussia, in a neighbourhood with a mixed population of
Germans, Poles, and Lithuanians. The name of the farmer's family is
Vogelreuther. Marikke, a Lithuanian gipsy girl, is a foster-child in
their house, having been picked up along with her mother and carried
home by Mr. and Mrs. Vogelreuther in their sledge during the famine
winter of 1867. In the house she is known as Heimchen (the Cricket) and
in the neighbourhood as the 'famine child.' In the farm-house lives a
young man named George, an orphan nephew of Vogelreuther, indebted to
the famine for his upbringing. In the opening of the play George has
made a good start in life, having been apprenticed to an architect in
Königsberg and done well. He is betrothed to the farmer's daughter
Gertrude, but some years before there had been a love affair between him
and Heimchen, who had repulsed him hastily, not because she did not care
for him, but because she did not believe in the honesty of his
intentions. While busying herself with preparations for her
foster-sister's coming marriage, Heimchen discovers a manuscript book
belonging to George and containing verses and a diary. She cannot resist
the temptation to read, and she thus discovers that George had loved her
deeply and seriously, despite the difference in their standing.
Heimchen's mother--a besotted and thievish old woman--haunts the
neighbourhood, and has been recognised by her daughter. Heimchen has
been told that her mother is dead, but knows better. Meetings with the
terrible old woman re-awaken the gipsy instincts in Heimchen. George
loves her still at heart, and circumstances draw the two together. The
crisis is reached on the night of St. John's eve, when after an evening
in which the whole neighbourhood, lit up with bonfires, is given over to
punch drinking, dancing, and excitement. George is requested by the
unsuspecting farmer to escort Heimchen to the railway station, she
having a night train to catch to Königsberg. The ending is intensely
Ibsenesque in style. George, on the very day fixed for his wedding with
Gertrude, is ready to fly with Heimchen, but, mindful of the immense
obligations binding them both to the farmer's family, he insists that
there shall be at least an explanation. Heimchen, instinctively grasping
the difference between a man's and a woman's love, foresees the regrets
that would result from the overthrow of George's plans. She changes her
attitude and forbids him to speak to the farmer. The St. John fires are
burnt out. The midsummer madness is over. It is now for her to return to
duty and dulness and the burden of a starved heart. For life she must
remain satisfied with her one night of bliss on St. John's eve. So she
stands alone and watches the departure of George's and Gertrude's
wedding procession.

"The great scene of the play, in which Heimchen and George are left
alone together, is managed with wonderful stagecraft. Till the last
moment they seem to be adhering to 'good resolutions,' but a series of
incidents, all absolutely natural, occur to distract attention and cause
delay, till they hear the whistle of the train and know that it is too
late. The bonfires, the punch-drinking, and, above all, George's speech,
from which the quotation at the head of these notes is taken, have fired
their blood, and Heimchen is unstrung by the painful meeting with her
disreputable mother earlier in the day, when she had been obliged to buy
back things that her mother had pilfered. At last she throws herself on
her knees before George and says, 'Du! Küss' mich nicht! Ich will dich
küssen. Ich will alles auf mich nehmen. Meine Mutter stiehlt. Ich stehl'
auch'--and the curtain falls."

To return to the date of Johnstone's arrival at the _Guardian_ office in
Manchester, where he was made welcome. He found friends upon the staff,
and kept them in spite of his want of sympathy with some of the
political views of the paper. On politics he never wrote, except when
recording matters of fact on his mission to the Greco-Turkish war. But,
not to speak of living persons, he was brought for some years into close
contact with one of the best-equipped and finest-tempered journalists
of our time. William Thomas Arnold, the son of Thomas, and nephew of
Matthew Arnold, was one of the two or three men, senior to himself, in
his personal circle, for whom Johnstone had a profound regard both as a
man and as a master-craftsman. This regard was well-deserved. An
authoritative scholar in the history of the early Roman Empire, a critic
who cast original light on Keats and some of the Jacobean poets, at home
in Dryden, in the French literature both of the great century and the
romantic age, abreast also of criticism in both countries, and a sound
vigorous judge of acting and the drama, Arnold made time to share the
daily burdens and aid in sustaining the high uncompromising standards of
a newspaper whose many foes have never questioned its consistent and
iron courage during the last ten years. Arnold often stood to Johnstone
in the capacity of actual editorial chief for the evening. It is hateful
to be edited, even to the change of a comma, except where errors of fact
or risks of libel are in question. Political contributions are another
thing; a common line--the "view of the paper"--must be adhered to, and
self-sacrifice in detail, within large limits, is simply necessary. That
is warfare; you may resign your commission, but, if you do not, must
accept instructions. But in art and letters! The mutual respect of the
two men may be measured by the freedom that was left to Johnstone, and
by the spirit in which he, rightly the most sensitive of men in such
concerns and naturally irritable, took the occasional blue-pencillings.
His other colleagues also held Johnstone in regard, in spite of the
vehemence with which he went his own way. Sometimes he would come in
from the concert, like an instrument whose strings are still quivering
at full pitch, and this is not the mood for rapid committee work at
night. There might be one great explanation from time to time which
cleared the air. It was seen that he was thinking of his subject, and
not of his own vanity, and that he was immensely, indignantly, and
delightfully wrapped up in that subject. On the whole it was a good
training for him, and few strong men, beginning at the age of
thirty-four, would have shown themselves, despite occasional rubs, so
reasonably adaptive. It may also be said that few newspapers would have
stood so well by a writer who, whenever he felt it his duty to do so,
would promptly perturb the musical hive, careless whether drone or
hornet minded. Mr. John Morley, who ought to know, has expressed some
doubt as to whether journalism tends to special elevation of character.
There are cases where the doubt does not arise. When the critic, on
artistic, and therefore on public, grounds, and with due store of
knowledge, raises a fury by his condemnations, and when the editor, who
has to think of his paper and its standing, supports the critic,
believing him likely to be right, that is a good evening's work. The
scope therefore granted to Johnstone as a journalist by his editor was a
proof of sagacity, for he became a power in the musical community, not
only of Manchester but of the larger region the _Manchester Guardian_
reaches. No doubt, though he was allowed as free a hand in expressing
his opinions as any other of his craft, and a much freer one than the
majority, he sometimes wearied of the necessary restrictions of a
journalist's position and their deadening effect upon the mind. An
outburst, expressive of a deep and recurring mood, occurs in a letter of
January, 1902, written on his return to Manchester, and describing a day
he had spent in London with York Powell.

"There is now no one in this neighbourhood with whom I can _converse_. I
find myself permanently in the journalistic attitude, regarding it as
luck if I can say two per cent. of what I think about anything; so the
meeting with Powell was an oasis at the end of some very sandy months."

This complaint was laid not against the paper he served, but against the
sparseness of the kind of society he liked best. To understand it some
curious features of life in Manchester must be recalled. He used at
times to come to a small society of friends, which lasted for eight or
nine years, and met during the business year at about monthly intervals,
at the members' dwellings, for free conversation. He is remembered as
having there discoursed on Tolstoy's conceptions of art with his usual
energy and elaboration. The stringent mad-logic of the great art-hater
had once attracted, but at last disgusted him, and he saw that even
Tolstoy's famed novels, with their show of godlike equity, really held
the seed of his later prejudices against science, art, and sexual love.
But such occasions when he could talk freely seemed to grow rarer. The
fault lay somewhat, no doubt, in his own radical solitariness of mind,
but also in the surrounding conditions.

Huge Manchester, almost a metropolis, is full of force, full of mental
as well as commercial stir; it is not, no, it is not! a _social_ city.
If it ever learns how to amuse itself, it will really be that; it will
be a metropolis. The reasons of the defect are partly physical. It has
an air, a rainfall, a climate, and an aspect, that do not make for good
spirits. The suburbs lie far apart in a ring round the business crater,
which becomes dark and most unfestal after ten o'clock at night, and
which those who cannot drive think twice of crossing. Also there is an
unfused mixture of races and classes. Apart from Greeks and Armenians,
who stand apart from one another and from other nations, there are the
German and other Jews on one side, and the Germans who are not Jews
markedly on another side. There are the big Lancashire money-makers, of
the soil; the shopkeepers and the vast clerkly multitude; the
professional classes, or castes; and the hand-workers, rough, but in
essential breeding and wits perhaps the soundest of all. For social
purposes many of these elements do not count. It is the Germans, the
Jews, and the professional classes, with many of the intelligent
business men in a large way, who probably civilise Manchester, in the
stricter sense of the term. It is as civilised an English city as can be
found in England outside London, if the press, the libraries, the
university, the theatres, and the music, be all weighed together. But
its bent hardly lies towards society, in the sense of ringing,
collective, intellectually disinterested talk, or towards gaiety of the
more bearable kind. There is ample dining, dancing, and official
entertainment, but those are not enough for salvation. The vast number
of philanthropic, educational, religious, and political agencies, which
fill playtime with labour for the good of mankind or party, entitle the
city to be called great and progressive, but they do not precisely make
it blithe. They inspire respect, and no one who has not lived there many
years can realise their number or the strenuous, positive, character of
the place; the southern nature seems soft and vague in comparison. But
the free talk of the real capitals, and their resources for witty
amusement, imply a large leisured class, an element of _flâneurs_ in the
population, which is hardly possible in a big North-English city. There
is personal isolation in a curious measure--a want of rallying points
for talk. The atoms repel each other and fly apart. Men go home to their
families or rooms and stop there. If they go out, it is often for some
"meeting" of an earnest description, not to amuse themselves; or, if
they wish to do this, they go to music, which is a somewhat solitary
pleasure. Talk, for the satisfaction of talking, is less common. There
are exceptions; but this is the impression given by long residence in
Manchester. The Germans, with their club and singing and cheerfulness,
have done their best for their adopted city. But it was hard for a
cosmopolitan person like Arthur Johnstone, at once deeply bent on art
and beauty of all kinds, and also demanding some kind of cheerful
foreign life in the intervals of work, to find his account quickly in
his new abode, and the opinion of it we have recorded above is largely
his own.

For some time, therefore, he felt that Manchester was admirable rather
than refreshing. It had found for him the work of his life; he soon
became a force in his own calling; he had friends, new as well as old,
in the place; and he liked it better, as time passed, and as he managed
to find some of the intelligent festiveness that he wanted. Gradually he
touched several quite different circles, chiefly doubtless the musical,
but others also, journalistic, academic, and professional. Except with a
few, Johnstone made his way somewhat slowly in society. He could be
outspoken, uncompromising, and even explosive (though he never attacked
unless he thought there was provocation). These characteristics and his
daring line as a critic, both in talk and print, caused him to be
under-estimated by some otherwise intelligent persons. He might have
said, with Saint-Simon, that he was not "un sujet académique." He
disliked dons as a class; at Oxford and elsewhere they made him, of
course wrongly, restive. He had not been through their mill, and they
did not always care for or see his curious and original play of mind.
Their committee-trained caution of phrase was alarmed by his emphasis
and heavy-shotted superlatives, which merely amused his friends. There
were, of course, those among them who liked him well. In some houses he
had, apart from his musical gifts, a certain name for being "clever and
spiky." The latter epithet was only partially true, for he was
simple-hearted and good-natured the moment that the occasion arose. "His
sympathy," writes Madame de Navarro (Miss Mary Anderson), "never failed,
and his unaffected love and enthusiasm for the good, the true, and the
beautiful, could always be counted upon." All who had eyes saw this in
Johnstone, but all had not eyes. He was interested, absorbed, whelmed in
his subject, and thought instinctively more about ideas and purposes
than about persons, so that he sometimes ignored persons and therefore
dissatisfied them. He also said, what is true, that of the provinces, as
compared with the capital, "the favourite sin is cowardice." This, and
any semblance of snobbery, he openly despised. He liked to have power
and weight--and was right in liking it--in order to carry out certain
musical reforms. But he dismissed at once anyone who, as he put it, "may
be very well-informed, yet clearly cares nothing at all for things in
themselves, but simply and solely to be a person of consideration." So,
except as a musical critic, his measure, for good reasons, was not
invariably taken. He knew this fact, and felt it with some keenness, but
not from the side of disappointed conceit. He thought it was his lot in
life not to be able to talk freely and acceptably save to a very few
persons. He was sorry, but convinced that thus he was built. The old
Oxford sense of solitariness--and Oxford leaves dregs in the cup for
these her sensitive children--does not easily let go its victim. The
happiness and success of the latter years, however, were to leave him
markedly easier, mellower, and more communicative. He was, indeed, fully
entering on his own when he was cut down. But a larger and more various
experience than ever yet, both of thought and travel, was to be his lot
within the last eight years of his short life.

In April, 1897, Johnstone made his appearance in a new capacity. The
dispute between Greece and Turkey over the treatment of the Christians
in Crete had reached an acute stage and war was expected to break out at
any moment. The _Manchester Guardian_, more than any other English
newspaper, had championed the Greek cause. Naturally the proprietors
wished to secure the best and fullest accounts of the operations and to
have them despatched in advance of other papers. Mr. J. B. Atkins was
chosen to accompany the army in the field, and Johnstone's knowledge of
modern languages and acquaintance with Eastern Europe marked him out as
a valuable colleague. He was posted at Athens to receive reports from
the front, to arrange all the details connected with their transmission,
and to review the progress of the war, work which he carried through
very successfully. His gift of tongues, which once caused him to be
congratulated in Germany on "speaking English so well," enabled him soon
to get a working knowledge of modern Greek; he was fortunate too in
finding a Greek gentleman, who, grateful for the attitude of the
_Manchester Guardian_, acted as his interpreter and showed him about the
city. The same friend was on intimate terms with the Royal family, and
introduced Johnstone to the King and the Duke of Sparta. At the close of
his stay at Athens, he hesitatingly asked if there was any return he
could make for the various kindnesses he had received, when this friend
of royalty named so modest a fee that Johnstone was staggered; "it was
the pourboire of a head-waiter," he said afterwards when describing the
incident, adding that he had never realised what true democracy meant
until then. Among his associates there was the correspondent of a
Viennese paper who had somehow incurred the dislike and suspicion of the
war-party, but, as Johnstone thought, unjustly. At last his life was
openly threatened; there was no hope for him unless he managed to leave
the country at once, and even then there was a fair chance that he might
never reach the ship alive. Johnstone, being on good terms with the
patriotic party, pleaded for his life and undertook to get him away; he
cycled behind him for the four miles from Athens to the Piræus, and when
they reached the harbour kept the mob off until he was safely on board
an Austrian Lloyd steamer. The ride was an exciting one, for it was
expected that an attempt would be made to shoot the obnoxious
correspondent on the way down to the port; some shots were actually
fired, but went wide of the mark. When the war was nearing the end
Johnstone's services were not so necessary at Athens, and he went to
join Mr. Atkins in camp; but he saw no fighting, for the day after his
arrival peace was declared. His colleague returned to England, and
Johnstone spent some weeks in Crete to investigate the stories of those
atrocities which had been the immediate cause of the war. He went _sac
au dos_ like J. K. Huysmans in 1870, but unlike him, roughed it with
good humour and looked upon hardships of this kind as a helpful and
valuable experience. A year later when congratulating a friend, who was
somewhat habit-ridden, on his marriage, he wrote, "The problem of
changing one's habits is emphatically one of those to be solved
'_ambulando_.' The forms of ambulation best adapted to the purpose are
serving on a campaign, doing time 'with,' and getting married;"
admitting, however, that the last, though less drastic, was more
permanent in its effect.

Of the stay in Crete he always spoke as the best holiday of his life. He
was struck with the beauty both of the lowlands and the hills, and
predicted the day when the isle would be one of the great resorts of
Europe. The mountaineers redeemed for him the modern Greek race, which
his experience in Athens had led him to scorn utterly. He thought that
the citizen and official class were shifty and mendacious, and his
epithets were Juvenalian in vigour. The hillmen were of another race, in
body and spirit, and he loved sharing their hardy life. It is right to
add that he exempted the ordinary Greek soldier on the mainland from the
condemnation which he reserved for the officers. Some considerable time
he spent on the water, chartering a small steamer in order to coast up
near the seat of war. Before making his way homeward he went to
Constantinople, and the surface view, at any rate, of the Turk pleased
him well. He returned home in unusually buoyant health and wearing a
moustache, having fallen under the spell of Eastern prejudice against
the clean-shaved.

At the beginning of the musical season in October, 1898, a considerable
storm was raised in Manchester by the action of the guarantors of the
Hallé concerts, who had offered the post of conductor to Dr. Richter,
instead of renewing Dr. Cowen's appointment. It fell to Johnstone to
write the two leading articles on the subject which appeared in the
_Manchester Guardian_ of October 4th and 17th. His clear and judicial
summing up of the case left no room for questioning the right of the
guarantors to act as they had done, while his special knowledge of Dr.
Richter's immense services to musical art enabled him to write with
authority on the great chance now open for Manchester's acceptance. In
short, the point at issue lay between sentimental considerations and the
good of the community, and Johnstone very naturally declared for the
latter. Our reference to this controversy is intentionally brief, but
its importance at the time was considerable. Johnstone was now
recognised as a leader of musical opinion in Manchester, a position and
influence which became greatly extended in the years that followed.

There is no doubt as to the kind of power that he exerted. He did not
touch the actual administration of music in Manchester, in the College
of Music, or the Hallé concerts, or elsewhere. He did not directly
advise, therefore, in the choice of programmes, players, or singers. But
he went to every performance of the slightest note, whether popular or
not, and wrote about it incisively and heedfully, always preferring to
praise and interpret, but hitting very hard when he thought it
imperative to do so. He went to the prize exhibitions of the college
pupils, and reviewed them (omitting names) with a sympathetic ear for
promise. He lectured, often very well, at Mr. Rowley's Sunday gatherings
in Ancoats, and also in the History Theatre of Owens College. As a
lecturer, it may be observed, he suffered at times from having too much
to say and failing to compress it perfectly. But he held an audience of
unprofessional hearers with his sharply-cut and pungent style; and, in
one respect he was a fortunately un-English lecturer, for his power of
graphic gesture was quite noteworthy. These, however, were casual
activities; presswork took almost all his strength. He did a vast amount
of musical reviewing, and his room was stacked with the publications
that he simply found it useless to criticise. But the notices of actual
singing and playing were his main labour, as well as the pioneer
articles on unknown or imperfectly appreciated works. These were of high
value, and contain some of his best writing, being done at fuller
leisure. As to the quality of his published utterances we may say no
more; the articles we have saved for this book must speak for
themselves. But, without doubt, his judgment was looked for, and
welcomed or feared. He made it less easy for bad performers to come
again. He was generous, preferring even a slight excess, to oncoming and
unrecognised talent, or to remote and exotic kinds of talent which made
the fashionable multitude impatient. He became the worthy and articulate
voice of musical opinion in and beyond one of the English capitals of
the art.

We could hardly illustrate the kind of power that Johnstone exerted
better than by quoting what Canon Gorton writes concerning his
connection with the Morecambe musical festival:--

"Our festival was born in 1891. From the first it was organised entirely
apart from any pecuniary object; it brought us some delightful music, as
we set our own test pieces, and its aim was essentially educational. Our
special correspondent from the _Manchester Guardian_ did not arrive on
the scene until 1899. We had grown accustomed to unstinted praise, the
judges exhausted the adjectives in the language in describing the
excellence of the singing, composers told us that they had never heard
their part-songs so perfectly rendered. We thought we were perfect. Then
came a bomb from the critic (April 27th, 1899). He was not in touch with
us or cognisant with our aim, nor did he allow for our limitations. Much
of the music seemed to him unworthy; the competitive or sporting element
annoyed him; he saw rocks ahead, rocks on which others had been wrecked.
He wrote: 'The array of talent is no doubt imposing, but far too much of
the music is of an inferior stamp. It should not be forgotten that the
end and aim of such festivals is to foster a taste for music. But the
taste for inferior music needs no fostering. If, therefore, the
organisers of these festivals prescribe second-rate works for the
competitions, they simply destroy the _raison d'être_ of these
competitions. It is music as an art--not music as a sport or trade--that
requires fostering. There is a danger that such concerts may degenerate
into a vulgar pot-hunting business, and one would like to see everything
done, both as regards the music prescribed and the conduct of the
proceedings of the festival itself, to guard against that danger.' I do
not claim to know much about music, but I recognise good English when I
see it. I saw that 'our special correspondent' was a master of his
craft. I replied at once in the _Manchester Guardian_ rejecting his
interpretation of our motives, and still more the motives which brought
choirs to our Festival. I said that 'no chastening was joyous' and urged
that the critic should have patience, that we were then walking and that
some day we would run, and expressed a hope that he might be there to
see. I afterwards called upon him at the Reform Club, and this commenced
a friendship, the memory of which I shall always hold as a matter of
pride. He henceforth became for us 'the critic.' We not only awaited
his arrival, but in choice of music Mr. Howson (the choir-master) even
applied an additional test: 'This will test the choir, but will it also
satisfy Mr. Arthur Johnstone's taste?' The choir were conscious ever of
his presence. The judges were in the box giving their awards, but 'Mr.
Johnstone is in the grand circle, what does he think?' I heard him once
appeal to his wife; 'Am I not always open to conviction?' With his first
article in view, and with the knowledge of what subsequently he did for
us, I could but allow that he made good his claim, for he became the
most stalwart defender of our Morecambe musical festival--'a movement,'
he wrote in 1903 'that is one of the most genuine and hopeful things in
the musical England of to-day.' Again he complained that 'little or
nothing has been done by the teachers of music in Manchester to
encourage the musical revival that for a good many years had been going
on in the North of England, and more particularly in Lancashire.' Later,
he wrote a remarkable article in reply to the strictures of Mr. J.
Spencer Curwen. Mr. Curwen had questioned whether our festivals help
choral music in the long run, and proceeded to comfort us by saying that
'we were entering upon a dangerous path. The more success you have, the
nearer you will approach to the state of things which exists in Wales.'
To this belated warning Mr. Johnstone replied (October 5th, 1903): 'The
peculiar evils enumerated by Mr. Spencer Curwen as being fostered by
competitions were observed a good many years ago by those who are
organising meetings in North Lancashire. Indeed, one may say the
observation of these evils was the point of departure in Lancashire, and
we are, therefore, a little tired of these strictures on the choirs got
up to learn certain pieces, dispersing immediately afterwards; on
fragmentary performances, and the rest of the black things on Mr.
Curwen's list. It is evident that Mr. Curwen is entirely without
knowledge of the best Lancashire choirs formed by the influence of
competition in their own neighbourhood. These choirs have as strong a
principle of cohesion as any in the world. Their repertory is
exceedingly wide. Their organisers show immense enterprise in unearthing
the treasures of the old English and Italian madrigal writers and of the
finest modern part-song writers. Let Mr. Curwen go to Morecambe next
spring; his ideas on the subject of musical competition will be pretty
thoroughly revolutionised.' Yes, Mr. Johnstone was open to conviction,
sought nothing less than the truth, was at infinite pains to obtain
it--_O si sic omnes_. But the debt we owe to him was not merely because
he was a critic keen to discern the good, not merely because he proved a
fearless champion. He became a friend always ready to discuss methods of
development, and to place his exact and wide knowledge at our disposal,
and after we had formed our plans it was a great gain to Mr. Howson and
myself to test their wisdom by his opinion. He spoke frequently of the
capacity for conducting which the festival revealed, and inveighed
against the star system, whether among vocalists, instrumentalists, or
conductors--and of these last he had in his mind's eye several whom he
maintained we ought to rely upon. It does not fall to me to speak of him
as a friend, as a delightful companion, as a courteous gentleman--one
whom I married and one whom, alas! I buried in the prime of his powers."

Johnstone took the position he had thus made with increasing
seriousness, and worked during the Manchester musical season harder than
ever. In the summer he went abroad, but not entirely for rest. He
greatly expanded his knowledge, and also his musical reputation and that
of his paper, by his visit to festivals at Bayreuth, at Oberammergau,
at Düsseldorf, and at Vienna. Forced to choose, we have hardly been
able, within these limits, to quote from the contributions he sent home.
The last of his foreign journeys was unlike all the others, which had
been taken alone. The words quoted above from the letter of January,
1902, were no longer to be true, though the desired companionship came
late. A solitary life in lodgings, and the absence of domestic ties to
one of his affectionate and home-loving nature (which lay behind his
gipsy habits) could not be compensated even by hosts of friends; but
brighter days were in store. In June, 1902, he became engaged to Miss
Lucy Morris, a Manchester lady who had won considerable distinction at
Cambridge; and henceforward the most human of interests gave fresh
inspiration to his life and work.

Their marriage took place two years later, on June 28th, 1904, quietly
at Morecambe. The friend of both, Canon Gorton, married them, and
another friend, Mr. Howson, undertook the musical part of the ceremony,
which was performed by the Morecambe Madrigal Society and the church
choir. There never was a wedding with better music, and for once the
hackneyed description, "the service was fully choral," might have been
used with a real meaning. The honeymoon was spent on the Riffel Alp:
afterwards the travellers attended the Bayreuth festival, returning to
Manchester at the end of August, where they went to live at Tarnhelm
(named after the magic helmet of the "Ring") in Victoria Park. A few
more months of happiness remained to Johnstone. On Thursday, December
8th, he was taken seriously ill, but though in considerable pain he
attended a concert in the evening, and wrote a notice of the
performance. The next morning his condition was worse, and on Saturday
he was operated upon for appendicitis. But relief came too late, and on
Friday, December 16th, his sufferings ended. He had just completed his
forty-third year: he was in the plenitude of his intellectual powers,
and had entered upon the happiest and most useful period of his life.

This cruel and sudden ending to Johnstone's career, at a moment when he
had reason to be reconciled to life and to forgive circumstance, when he
was wider in his critical sympathies and more thoroughly master of his
means of expression than ever before, and when his public influence was
strong, stirred the musical society of north-western England. North and
South are two different nations--neighbours that often carefully ignore
and misunderstand each other. This appears to be specially the case in
musical criticism. The London press said much too little. But the word
"provincial" has no application to the musical energies of Manchester.
It is like one of the great German towns, Munich or Frankfurt, being
wholly independent of the capital, of which it is not a colony. The mark
made by Johnstone in this region was attested in a measure that he would
never have foreseen. The _Manchester Guardian_, besides giving an
honourable obituary notice to its critic, received far more letters in
his honour, expressing sorrow at his early death and admiration of his
character, than it found space to print, although the most salient of
them filled its columns. They were written with knowledge, not by
laymen, but by persons with whom Johnstone had worked and had dealt
faithfully, sometimes stringently. The remark of Canon Gorton, "I began
my friendship with a quarrel," might be echoed more than once.
Johnstone's clean, hard literary thrust, or _punch_, free from noisy
hammering violence, was a not infrequent introduction to his
acquaintance. It was given with a will, but in a spirit thoroughly, and
to third parties amusingly, impersonal. The letters as a whole give a
clear notion of the intelligent professional view concerning him; of
his honesty, catholicity, and knowledge. He had been everywhere, he
counted, and when he had gone he was missed.

One of Johnstone's brothers in the craft, Mr. Ernest Newman, after
referring to a dispute which had led to their friendship, spoke of him
as "the best and strongest Englishman of our time in this line." Dr.
Adolph Brodsky, after praising in especial Johnstone's accounts of
pianoforte performances, singled out his services in breaking down the
popular prejudice in England against Bach. Others wrote of his musical
erudition and his "laudable desire to prevent anything in the form of
charlatanism from finding a place in the musical assemblies of
Manchester." Canon Gorton, who, as we quoted above, wrote with gratitude
of the high stimulus given by Johnstone to those local efforts which
save music from being unduly centralised in the bigger cities, and his
pertinent remarks upon the rarity and value of great musical critics
claim quotation, as they bring home the public sense of loss in
Johnstone's death.

"He held a high view of his office, and would make a sacrifice of self
rather than a sacrifice of truth. It is difficult to calculate the
extent of your loss. Musicians succeed musicians; they being dead may
yet speak. But the critic's words are ephemeral; they remain in the
files of the newspapers. For musicians there are schools; but what
school is there for critics? In music we need guides, men with a wide
horizon, a general culture, men unfettered by musical faction, with
definite ideals, with command of the English tongue, of courage and of
true instinct. Such an one, I take it, was Mr. Arthur Johnstone. Who
will fill his place?"

Upon this precise statement of the case we could not try to improve. We
can only add some words upon the nature of the man apart from his
profession. In an estimate of Johnstone's character the foremost place
must be assigned to his love of truth in all things; this virtue was the
touchstone he applied to his friends and to all artistic work. M. Vantyn
happily quotes, as the most appropriate motto for him, Locke's words,
"To love truth for truth's sake is the principal part of human
perfection in this world and the seed-plot of all other virtues," adding
by way of comment, "In everything, in all intercourse, upon all
occasions, under all circumstances, whether in enjoyment, in work, in
serious intercourse, he was a gentleman in the strictest sense of the
word." Next we may place his wonderful sympathy with the oppressed in
every class. Even where there was much that roused his anger in the
sinner, as in the case of Oscar Wilde, he was indignant at the merciless
treatment he received, and pleaded for a minor punishment. Where his
sympathy could have free play he was tender in the extreme, he would
take infinite personal trouble, and give all that his modest means
permitted. He was fond of animals, he disliked the idea of killing them
in "sport," and was glad that most of his intimate friends shared his
view. But he was not unreasonable on this point; and, to take the real
test question, he was not absolutely opposed to vivisection under
stringent conditions. For all his early talk of the "joy of life" he was
more anxious to secure it for others than for himself. He was tolerant
under his armour, and would rebuke pointless severity by saying, "Well,
well, there is something wrong with almost everybody;" but he did not
extend this indulgence to the cruel and pedantic. His youthful
rebelliousness, apartness, and questioning of society did not all
vanish, but were taken up and transformed into a more flexible temper;
for they had never been the mere plant of nihilism and vanity, that a
selfish nature manures in its barren private garden. Some of his friends
valued, above all, his total lack of the small inquisitiveness, which he
resented more than anything in others. He was deep in his work or in
the minor preparations for the day, and did not trouble much about his
friends' affairs. But when anything was doing, he emerged at once. When
one of his old companions was in suspense over illness at home, and yet
could do nothing but wait, Johnstone planned for him and personally
conducted an elaborate series of distractions and amusements covering
about four hours--not an easy thing to do in Manchester--each of them
appearing to be improvised as it came. The trouble over, he relapsed
into thought and went his ways. There were many such incidents. A
picturesque and noble character of this kind, with its traits of
quaintness, claims thus much record, and the more so that reticence made
it less easy to discover. To the public the journalist is such a mere
spectral hand and pen, writing by lamplight, without a face or form
behind it, as we hear of in a certain class of old ghost-stories.
Johnstone had become more than this to many of his readers. But they
could not know him as a man. It is well, therefore, to lift so much of
his privacy as may enable them partially to do so. He went through the
world scornful of its common valuations, appraising for himself,
watching with a certain isolation, and always preferring (if he must
choose) liberty to happiness, and rightful pride to obvious advantage.
But he was all the more human for that.

We may here say something about his piano playing. Johnstone, of course,
never professed to be more than an amateur. He was quite aware that the
difference in executive skill between the professional and the best
amateur is almost as great in music as in billiards; and that, to
paraphrase Matthew Arnold's saying, "Technique is three-fourths of
musical performance." As to the remaining fourth his playing stood on a
very high level. Even in undergraduate days the charm of his rendering
was considerable, always carefully thought out and individual. If he had
never heard a piece performed, his insight was remarkable, lighting
instinctively upon what one realised was the best way of playing it. His
touch was very delicate; he never forced the tone out of a piano, and
always avoided anything that might be called hard hitting. He liked best
playing something in the style of a Rubinstein barcarolle, where the
music should speak through a veil of sound. But his strength really lay
in a fine sense of rhythm, a rare gift even among great pianists.
Whatever piece he attempted he took at the proper pace, even if
occasionally a note might be missed or a passage blurred, rather than
give a false idea of it by playing too slowly; what was altogether
beyond his powers he left alone. On his return from the Cologne
Conservatoire his actual execution was at its best, the fingers strong
and lissom; and, being at the top of his physical health, his playing
was full of almost exuberant vitality. A weak circulation was always a
trial, and it was his habit to warm his fingers at a fire, when
possible, before sitting down to the piano. It was perhaps a small
talent, but singularly dainty and cultivated, for which our memory of
twenty-five years is profoundly grateful.

We might expect that the qualities he aimed at in his own playing would
be those that most attracted him in the great pianists of his period. Of
course he admired at their full value those transcendent players,
Rubinstein, Sophie Menter, Paderewski, Rosenthal; but there are also
artists equally unapproachable in their own delicate way, such as
Pachmann, Godowsky, Reisenauer, Siloti, and it was from them he received
the greatest personal pleasure.

As critic his first object was to explain the qualities and scope of the
music (in Pater's words, "to disengage its virtue"); to show, if a
classic, why it had attained its position, if modern, why it should
command serious attention. He never assumed too much musical knowledge
on the part of his readers, avoiding the use of technical expressions,
still more of stereotyped phrases. Bad work and slovenly performance he
could chastise unsparingly, but he never wrote harshly when he
recognised genuine effort, and he was very generous in his praise of
young performers, and often attended minor concerts at some
inconvenience to encourage rising artists. His style was clear and
precise, rather expository in tone; coloured when the occasion demanded,
and occasionally enriched with allusions to other arts. Thus the
elaborate tracery of Gothic architecture exhibited in Strasburg
Cathedral (a favourite figure) is employed to illustrate Bach and
contrasted with the formal classicism of earlier composers, and the
Palladian style of Handel; Elgar's "Dream of Gerontius" is compared to
some "jewelled _ciboire_ of the Middle Ages;" a pianist's playing of
arabesque passages reminds him of the "arrogance and costly unreason of
fine jewellery." His discernment of any new work of permanent value was
quick and unerring; we may instance his early estimate of Elgar and
indeed of Strauss too (for his position then was uncertain) as having
been in advance of general musical opinion, though unquestioned at the
present day. Tchaïkovsky's Pathetic Symphony was a more obvious
discovery; here he showed his critical power rather in quenching the
popular enthusiasm (which he had at first assisted in creating) for this
work when the public seemed to have lost all sense of proportion, by
reminding his readers that after all "Tchaïkovsky and Dvoràk are
inspired barbarians and must not be put on the same level with Beethoven
and Schumann." Mention too should be made of his appreciation of Liszt,
whose services to music are too frequently ignored--the creator of the
modern pianoforte technique, the brilliant and original composer, and
the generous friend of Wagner.

In their choice of the articles of which this volume is composed the
editors have given special prominence to those on the works of Sir
Edward Elgar and Herr Richard Strauss, the two composers of our time
who, as Johnstone considered, would bear the largest share in
influencing the cause of musical development. Many of the articles were
written on the first production of important works, and, in Elgar's
case, further impressions are given of later performances of the same
work. Those on the great acknowledged masters, if they cannot add much
more to our stock of actual knowledge, are interesting as confessions
of a sound musical faith. It is also true that the sum of potential
energy in the works of these great masters is infinite; in this sense,
that they strike a new flash out of every fresh and apprehensive mind.
They can beget generations of critics, each with another thing to say.
Such criticism is not a mere absorptive or passive process; it is
re-creation: it puts into fresh terms, by the art of words, some of the
impressions that have been built up of sound without language; or it
tells those who have felt the same thing what they did not clearly know
or remember that they had felt. The power to explain music is rarer than
competence in judging books. It may be thought that amongst Englishmen
of our generation Arthur Johnstone had as large a share as any of this
re-creative genius.
